Generative AI with sub-concepts (#2043)
Codecademy/docs: content/ai/concepts/generative-ai/generative-ai.md

---

> Title: 'Generative-AI'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Title: 'Generative AI'
```

An additional argument against it being art is that that the human element is not present in GenAI created works. The counter argument is that the creation is still driven by a person who has emotion, creativity, and intent.

## Applications

Generative AI is a combination of several technologies and has many applications. Effective LLMs are used to understand a natural language prompt and technologies such as diffusion models are used in the case of image generation.

Some content types GenAI is being used for include:

- [Text](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/generative-ai/text)
- [Images](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/generative-ai/images)
- [Music](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/generative-ai/music)
- [Code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/generative-ai/code)

### Other Areas

While GenAI is generally discussed in the context of text, images, music, and coding, there are many other active areas. Some of these include:

- Voice such as high fidelity text to speech

> - Scientific Discovery - generating hypothesis, accelerating discovery
> - Chemistry - molecule and drug discovery
> - Medical imaging
> - 3D Models - text to space creation
> - Video - movies, animations, transition between real and generated
> - Education - personalizing, customizing lessons, tutoring
> - Many others!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Scientific Discovery (generating hypothesis and accelerating discovery)
- Chemistry (molecule and drug discovery)
- Medical imaging
- 3D Models (text to space creation)
- Video (movies, animations, transition between real and generated)
- Education (personalizing, customizing lessons, tutoring)
```

## Impact and Possibilities

> ### Legality

Reviewer 3: This section addresses the problematic use of material (without permission or credit) for training, but it doesn't really touch on one of the biggest issues related to AI, which is the creation of content that is inaccurate (due to biases in training data or other factors), or intentionally  deceptive (deepfakes, fake news content). Please expand this section or add another to include these areas of concern.

Author: Added an Accuracy section "The correctness of the input data used during model training controls the accuracy of the generated content. There is no way to guarantee quality, accuracy, lack of bias, or timeliness. With the increased consumption of generated content, cases of misinformation (unintended and intended) are being considered."

### Policy

Different companies are quickly setting up policies around Generative-AI. Google announced that they are allowing AI-generated advertising content. Shutterstock has announced that they will allow the selling of content generated with OpenAI and are working on a royalty system for content used to sell generated content based on original work.

### Speed of change

What is different about Generative AI is the speed of change. This is creating fear of the unknown as it is difficult to predict what will happen next. Digital artists and some prominent tech leaders are calling for the halting of Generative AI until the impacts on society are more understood.

### Impact on Jobs

Generative AI is expected to have significant impacts on the working world. Hundreds of millions of jobs will be directly affected.

In some sense the change is expected to be welcomed as jobs that are currently mundane or have been difficult to automate will go away. For example frame editing, common artwork generation, and basic copywriting.

> One concern with this reduction is how jobs typically mentor juniors. If the mundane entry work goes away, how will the next generation be trained?

Author: How about... replacing the paragraph beginning with "One concern..." with "One impact of this reduction will be how new joiners are mentored. New joiners are often given basic knowledge-building tasks. The approach to mentorship will change with the ability of GenAI to accomplish these same basic tasks."

Subjects:
  - 'Machine Learning'
  - 'Data Science'
Tags:
  - 'AI'
CatalogContent:
  - 'paths/machine-learning-engineer'
  - 'intro-to-chatgpt'
---

**Generative AI** (GenAI) involves the creation of new and unique digital content. Before GenAI, digital content of this level could only be created by human beings. These unique creations are driven by natural language prompts.

## Generative AI

GenAI is based on **Large Language Models (LLMs)**. LLMs are trained on terabytes of textual data from the Internet. These models have the capability of understanding human language semantics and intent.

In the case of ChatGPT, one breakthrough was the discovery that with some additional training, the LLMs can be easily used to produce impressive text-based results.

GenAI is the connection of LLMs with technologies that, in addition to text results, can generate digital content such as images, video, music, or code.

There is exploration of going beyond digital content and use this technology for things as varied as the discovery of new molecules and 3D designs.

> Things are changing quickly and the impact is only just starting to being predicted and felt. Most people are expecting a step change in certain ways how we live and work.

Author: Fixed

### Foundation Models

In the past, AI applications were very task specific. The recent technology shift has been to use large foundation models to drive a number of different tasks. Large amounts of unstructured and unsupervised training is used to create the foundation model. LLMs are a type of foundation model.

The models have a generative ability and were the start of Generative AI. ChatGPT demonstrated the ability to generate text based on natural language prompts.

Using the concept of foundation models we can leverage the vast amount of pre-trained data with a small amount of additional tuning and prompting. Tuning adds labels into the data. Prompting bridges the gap between training and intention. While training the LLM is expensive, the usage referred to as inference is more cost effective.

### The Question of Intelligence?

> Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the matching or exceeding the intelligence of a human being. Things that we often associate with intelligence such as doing math, playing chess, or remembering vast amounts of data already can be done more quickly and better by computer.

Author: Fixed

With LLMs and a technology called diffusion AI systems can now match or exceed other skills we often associate with intelligence such as:

- Understanding and creating new text content.
- Writing never before created stories and poems.
- Analyzing content for tone and emotions.
- Creating unique images and video.

> ### Is it Art?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Is It Art?
```

Author: Fixed.

Another argument is that since there is no advanced skill required from the operator, it is not art. Some consider art as the application of skills developed over many years. However, some modern art has been about concept and technique - not necessarily skill.

An additional argument against it being art is that that the human element is not present in GenAI created works. The counter argument is that the creation is still driven by a person who has emotion, creativity, and intent.

## Applications

Generative AI is a combination of several technologies and has many applications. Effective LLMs are used to understand a natural language prompt and technologies such as diffusion models are used in the case of image generation.

Some content types GenAI is being used for include:

- [Text](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/generative-ai/text)
- [Images](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/generative-ai/images)
- [Music](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/generative-ai/music)
- [Code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/ai/generative-ai/code)

> ### Other areas

Author: Fixed

While GenAI is generally discussed in the context of text, images, music, and coding, there are many other active areas. Some of these include:

- Voice such as high fidelity text to speech
- Scientific Discovery - generating hypothesis, accelerating discovery
- Chemistry - molecule and drug discovery
- Medical imaging
- 3D Models - text to space creation
- Video - movies, animations, transition between real and generated
- Education - personalizing, customizing lessons, tutoring
- Many others!

## Impact and Possibilities

### Legality

The legal aspects of Generative AI are not yet defined. Class action lawsuits due to training data are showing up as infringing on the rights of artists. Related US laws include the first amendment and the fair use copyright act of 1976. These laws allow for the limited use of copyrighted material without permission of the copyright holder.

> Some uses are allowed, such as commentary, search engines, news reporting, research, and other transformative work. **Transformative** is defined as bringing a new expression, meaning, or message to the work. It can be argued that GenAI works can be transformative.

Author: Fixed.

### Policy

Different companies are quickly setting up policies around Generative-AI. Google announced that they are allowing AI-generated advertising content. Shutterstock has announced that they will allow the selling of content generated with OpenAI and are working on a royalty system for content used to sell generated content based on original work.

### Speed of change

What is different about Generative AI is the speed of change. This is creating fear of the unknown as it is difficult to predict what will happen next. Digital artists and some prominent tech leaders are calling for the halting of Generative AI until the impacts on society are more understood.

> ### How we work

Author: Fixed.

Generative AI is expected to have significant impacts on the working world. Hundreds of millions of jobs will be directly affected.

> In some sense the change is expected to be welcome as jobs that are currently mundane or have been difficult to automate will go away. For example frame editing, common artwork generation, and basic copywriting.

Author: Fixed.

### Possibilities

While any new disruptive technology creates a lot of uncertainties many people are also excited about what the future may bring.

Generative AI may open up entirely new ways to create and consume content. For example, media now is difficult and time-consuming to create even just in one length and format. Generative AI may allow different versions of movies, stories, and short videos to be generated from the same source media to allow new ways of media consumption.

Generation of speech based on text with high fidelity style will allow creators to make content where they were limited by voice overlay before.

With regards to code generation, automating repetitive work may result in higher quality code. Also it gives coders more time to focus on new creative user-centric solutions.

Movies and video creation once expensive and possible only by large studios and digital production groups can instead be created by individuals and is bound only by their imagination.

Content may be connected back through a block chain to compensate original creators.

> Generative AI may help people understand more how creative processes work in general and how to continually enhance the human process.

Author: Fixed.

---
Title: 'Generative-AI'

> Description: Generative AI (GenAI) involves the creation of new and unique digital content. Before GenAI digital content of this level could only be created by human beings. These unique creations are driven by natural language prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description: 'Generative AI (GenAI) involves the creation of new and unique digital content. Before GenAI digital content of this level could only be created by human beings. These unique creations are driven by natural language prompts.'
```

> Description: **Generative AI** (GenAI) involves the creation of new and unique digital content. Before **GenAI** digital content of this level could only be created by human beings. These unique creations are driven by natural language prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description: 'Generative AI (GenAI) involves the creation of new and unique digital content driven by natural language prompts.'
```

Subjects:
  - 'Machine Learning'
  - 'Data Science'

>   - 'Large Language Model'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>   - 'Transformers'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Tags:

Reviewer: Only AI is listed on the [Tags list](https://github.com/Codecademy/docs/blob/main/documentation/tags.md).
All the other terms should be added to that file in this PR.

  - 'AI'
  - 'Transformers'
  - 'Embeddings'
  - 'Prompts'
  - 'Prompt Engineering'
  - 'Attention'
CatalogContent:
  - 'machine-learning'
  - 'paths/data-science'
---

> **Generative AI** (GenAI) involves the creation of new and unique digital content. Before **GenAI** digital content of this level could only be created by human beings. These unique creations are driven by natural language prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Generative AI** (GenAI) involves the creation of new and unique digital content. Before GenAI, digital content of this level could only be created by human beings. These unique creations are driven by natural language prompts.
```

## Generative AI

> **GenAI** is based on **Large Language Models** (LLMs). **LLMs** are trained on terabytes of textual data from the Internet. These models have the capability of understanding human language semantics and intent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GenAI is based on Large Language Models (LLMs). LLMs are trained on terabytes of textual data from the Internet. These models have the capability of understanding human language semantics and intent.
```

> In the case of **ChatGPT**, one breakthrough was the discovery that with some additional training the **LLMs** can be easily used to produce impressive text based results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of ChatGPT, one breakthrough was the discovery that with some additional training the LLMs can be easily used to produce impressive text based results.
```

> **GenAI** is the connection of **LLMs** with technologies that in addition to text results can generate digital content such as images, video, music, or code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GenAI is the connection of LLMs with technologies that in addition to text results can generate digital content such as images, video, music, or code.
```

There is exploration of going beyond digital content and use this technology for things as varied as the discovery of new molecules and 3D designs.

Things are changing quickly and the impact is only just starting to being predicted and felt. Most people are expecting a step change in certain ways how we live and work.

> ### Foundation models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Foundation Models
```

> In the past, AI applications were very task specific. The recent technology shift has been to use large **foundation models** to drive a number of different tasks. Large amounts of unstructured and unsupervised training is used to create the **foundation model**. **LLMs** are a type of **foundation model**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the past, AI applications were very task specific. The recent technology shift has been to use large foundation models to drive a number of different tasks. Large amounts of unstructured and unsupervised training is used to create the foundation model. LLMs are a type of foundation model.
```

> The models have a generative ability and were the start of **Generative AI**. **ChatGPT** demonstrated the ability to generate and completed natural language prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The models have a generative ability and were the start of Generative AI. ChatGPT demonstrated the ability to generate text based on natural language prompts.
```

> Using the concept of **foundation models** we can leverage the vast amount of pre-trained data with a small amount of additional **tuning** and **prompting**. **Tuning** adds labels into the data. **Prompting** bridges the gap between training and our intention. While training the **LLM** is expensive, the usage referred to as **inference** is more cost effective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the concept of foundation models GenAI can leverage the vast amount of pre-trained data with a small amount of additional tuning and prompting. Tuning adds labels into the data. Prompting bridges the gap between training and intention. While training the LLM is expensive, the usage referred to as inference is more cost effective.
```

> ### The question of intelligence?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The Question of Intelligence
```

> Artificial Intelligence **AI** is the matching or exceeding the intelligence of a human being. Things that we often associate with intelligence such as doing math, playing chess, or remembering vast amounts of data already can be done more quickly better than a person.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the matching or exceeding the intelligence of a human being. Things that we often associate with intelligence such as doing math, playing chess, or remembering vast amounts of data already can be done more quickly and  better by computer.
```

> With **LLMs** and a technology called **diffusion** AI systems can now match or exceed other skills we often associate with intelligence such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With LLMs and a technology called diffusion, AI systems can now match or exceed other skills we often associate with intelligence such as:
```

> -Understanding and creating new text content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Understanding and creating new text content.
```

> -Writing never before created stories and poems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Writing never before created stories and poems.
```

> -Analyzing content for tone and emotions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Analyzing content for tone and emotions.
```

> -Creating unique images and video.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Creating unique images and video.
```

> ### Is it art?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Is it Art?
```

> In 2022 Jason Allen’s AI generated work, Théâtre D’opéra Spatial, won first place in the digital category at the Colorado State Fair. The artist did indicate that he used the **GenAI** platform **Midjourney**. It was later discovered that the judges weren't familiar with the tool at the time of judging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 2022 Jason Allen’s AI generated work, *Théâtre D’opéra Spatial*, won first place in the digital category at the Colorado State Fair. The artist did indicate that he used the GenAI platform Midjourney. It was later discovered that the judges weren't familiar with the tool at the time of judging.
```

> The question does **GenAI** create art is now being asked. Parallels are being drawn. When photography was introduced, only painting had ever been considered art. Photography wasn't considered art and the same discussion took place. Now, few people would argue that photography can be art.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The question does GenAI create art is now being asked. Parallels are being drawn. When photography was introduced, only painting had ever been considered art. Photography wasn't considered art and the same discussion took place. Now, few people would argue that photography cannot be art.
```

> Another argument is that since there is no advanced skill required from the operator. Some consider are the application of skills developed over many years. However, modern art has been about concept and technique - not necessarily skill.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another argument is that since there is no advanced skill required from the operator, it is not art. Some consider art as the application of skills developed over many years. However, some modern art has been about concept and technique - not necessarily skill.
```

> An additional argument is that the human element is not present in **GenAI** created works. The counter argument is that the creation is still driven by a person who has emotion, creativity, and intent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An additional argument against it being art is that the human element is not present in GenAI created works. The counter argument is that the creation is still driven by a person who has emotion, creativity, and intent.
```

## Applications

> Generative AI is a combination of several technologies and has many applications. Effective LLMs are used to understand a natural language prompt and a technologies such as **Diffusion models** in the case of image generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generative AI is a combination of several technologies and has many applications. Effective LLMs are used to understand a natural language prompt and a technologies such as diffusion models are used in the case of image generation.
```

> - Text and Writing

Reviewer: This bulleted list needs a opening sentence to give it context.

- Images
- Music
- Code

### Other areas

> While **GenAI** is generally discussed in the context of Text, Images, Music, and Coding there are many other active areas. Some of these include.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While GenAI is generally discussed in the context of text, images, music, and coding, there are many other active areas. Some of these include:
```

> - Voice such as high fidelity text to speech

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- High fidelity text to speech
```

> While **GenAI** is generally discussed in the context of Text, Images, Music, and Coding there are many other active areas. Some of these include.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While GenAI is generally discussed in the context of text, images, music, and coding, there are many other active areas. Some of these include:
```

> - Voice such as high fidelity text to speech

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- High fidelity text to speech
```

- Medical imaging
- 3D Models - text to space creation
- Video - movies, animations, transition between real and generated
- Education - personalizing, customizing lessons, tutoring
- Many others!

## Impact and Possibilities

### Legality

> The legal aspects of Generative AI is not yet defined. Class action lawsuits due to training data showing up infringing on the rights of artists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The legal aspects of Generative AI is not yet defined. Class action lawsuits are being filed due to training data infringing on the rights of artists.
```

> Freedom of expression, in the US fair use allows limited use of copyrighted material without permission of the copyright holder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the US fair use allows limited use of copyrighted material without permission of the copyright holder.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Such as commentary, search engines, news reporting, research so copyright law not to rigid. Transformative which is defined as a new expression, meaning, or message to the work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uses are allowed, such as commentary, search engines, news reporting, research and other transformative work. Transformative is defined as bringing a new expression, meaning, or message to the work. It can be argued that GenAI works can be transformative.
```

> The legal aspects of Generative AI is not yet defined. Class action lawsuits due to training data showing up infringing on the rights of artists. Freedom of expression, in the US fair use allows limited use of copyrighted material without permission of the copyright holder.

Author: Updated please review @HishamT

### Policy

> Different companies are quickly setting up polices around Generative AI. Google announced that they are allowing AI generated advertising content. Shutterstock has announced that they will allow the selling content generated with OpenAI only and are working on a royalty system for content used to sell generated content based on original work.

Author: Resolved

### Speed of change

What is different about Generative AI is the speed of change. This is creating fear of the unknown as it is difficult to predict what will happen next. Digital artists and some prominent tech leaders are calling for the halting of Generative AI until the impacts on society are more understood.

### How we work

> Generative AI is expected to have significant impacts on the working world. Directly hundreds of millions of jobs will be affected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generative AI is expected to have significant impacts on the working world. Hundreds of millions of jobs will be directly affected.
```

In some sense the change is expected to be welcome as jobs that are currently mundane or have been difficult to automate will go away. For example frame editing, common artwork generation, and basic copywriting.

> One concern with this reduction is how jobs typically mentor juniors. If the mundane entry work goes away - how will the next generation be trained?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One concern with this reduction is how jobs typically mentor juniors. If the mundane entry work goes away, how will the next generation be trained?
```

### Possibilities

While any new disruptive technology creates a lot of uncertainties many people are also excited about what the future may bring.

Generative AI may open up entirely new ways we can create and consume content. For example media now is difficult and time consuming to create even just in one length and format. Generative AI may allow different versions of movies, stories, and short videos to be generated from the same source media to allow new ways of media consumption.

Generation of speech based on text with high fidelity style will allow creates to make content where they were limited by voice overlay before.

> Code generation, while automating repetitive work may result in higher quality code and the focus on new creative user centric solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code generation, while automating repetitive work may result in higher quality code and the focus on new creative user-centric solutions.
```

> Generation of speech based on text with high fidelity style will allow creates to make content where they were limited by voice overlay before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generation of speech based on text with high fidelity style will allow creators to make content where they were limited by voice overlay before.
```
